\chapter{Conclusions}
\label{cha:conclusions}

This thesis described the design and implementation of an asynchronous data
access middleware for Pervasive Systems. As shown in previous chapters, the
implementation of this middleware began with an analysis of the existing data
access layer employed to support the execution of PerLa Queries, aimed at
identifying its weaknesses and strength; a series of requirements was 


\section{Future work}

\subsection{Implementation of new plugins}

The New PerLa Middleware is designed to be expanded through the addition of new
modules, and it should come as no surprise that one of its intended evolution
paths consists in fact in the development of new Plugins. As described in
chapter~\ref{cha:components}, there are two main types of modules that can be
added to the PerLa Plugin System: \texttt{Channels} and \texttt{Mappers}.

The possibility to add new \texttt{Channel} implementations is a distinguishing
feature of the New Middleware design that should be effectively exploited to
extend the range of supported endpoint devices. At the time of writing the
selection of Plugins shipped with the core Middleware distribution allows PerLa
to connect with HTTP services and TinyOS motes. This initial line-up should be
only considered as a starting point, since a larger assortment of communication
systems is required to manage even the most rudimentary Pervasive Systems. The
following list contains a choice of protocols and networking technologies for
which a dedicated \texttt{Channel} implementation is advised:

\begin{itemize}

    \item \textbf{TCP/IP:} Widely employed in a vast variety of devices,
    ranging from high-end personal computers to low power devices;

    \item \textbf{Bluetooth LE:} One of the leading technologies for wireless
    area networks. Currently supported by all major Operating Systems,
    Bluetooth LE found its way into many different applications, like fitness
    bands, smartphones, healthcare instruments, home entertainment devices and
    localization beacons;

    \item \textbf{IEEE 802.15.4 based protocols:} IEEE 802.15.4 is a physical
    layer widely employed in many personal area network protocols. It is the
    basis for many networking specifications like Zigbee, Xbee and MiWi;

    \item \textbf{RS232:} Serial port communication. Its implementation should
    be considered in order to connect with legay devices and other low power
    systems (e.g., Arduino).

\end{itemize}

\texttt{Mapper}s represent another extension point of the PerLa Middleware
infrastructure that can be used to support additional data formats and
encodings. The only \texttt{Mapper} components available as of December 2014
in the core Middleware distribution provide support for JSON and URL-encoded
data structures. Analogously to what arelady stated for the \texttt{Channel}
component, future PerLa developers should consider implementing new
\texttt{Mapper}s to support the following data formats:

\begin{itemize}

    \item \textbf{C/C++ structs:} Its implementation should be a simple
    backport from the Classic Middleware architecture;

    \item \textbf{XML:} A markup language for document encoding;

    \item \textbf{CSV (Comma-Separated Values):} A simple format for the
    transmission and storage of tabular data.

\end{itemize}

\subsection{Alternative Device Descriptor forms}

As introduced in chapter~\ref{cha:components}, the new Plug \& Play node
registration system is comprised of two separate elements: a
\texttt{DeviceDescriptorParser} front-end, which analyzes the Device Descriptor
to build a format-agnostic Java representation of the Device Descriptor itself,
and the \texttt{FPCFactory}, which consumes this intermediate Java
representation to assemble the final \texttt{FPC}. This new architecture was
conceived to facilitate the future addition of alternative Device Descriptor
formats, which can now be easily performed by simply developing an appropriate
\texttt{DeviceDescriptorParser} module.

There are two main reasons for adding a new Device Descriptor representation:
first, to support a different data format that may be more convenient for some
devices (e.g., a JSON Device Descriptor); second, to create \texttt{FPC}s using
readily available industry standard device description technologies. This
former motivation leads us to one future development of the PerLa
infrastructure, namely the possibility of introducin a
\texttt{DeviceDescriptorParser} for the \textit{SensorML} \cite{sensorml}
sensor description format. Through this effort the PerLa Middleware would be
immediately compatible all devices for which a SensorML description is already
available.

\subsection{Distributed PerLa}
